Add optimization summary documents (#14999)
eclipse-openj9/openj9: doc/compiler/optimizer/LoopOptimizationSummary.md

General Public License, version 2 with the GNU Classpath
Exception [1] and GNU General Public License, version 2 with the
OpenJDK Assembly Exception [2].

[1] https://www.gnu.org/software/classpath/license.html
[2] http://openjdk.java.net/legal/assembly-exception.html

SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0 OR GPL-2.0 WITH Classpath-exception-2.0 OR LicenseRef-GPL-2.0 WITH Assembly-exception
-->

# [Loop Optimizations](https://github.com/eclipse/omr/blob/master/doc/compiler/optimizer/IntroLoopOptimizations.md)

## Loop Canonicalization
Loop Canonicalization transforms `while` loops to if-guarded `do-while` loops
with a loop invariant (pre-header) block. It places the loop test at the end
of the trees for the loop, so that the loop back-edge is almost always a
backwards branch.

## Loop Versioning and Loop Specialization
During Loop Versioning, loop invariant null checks, bound checks, div checks,
checkcasts and inline guards (where the `this` does not change in the loop)
are eliminated from loops by placing equivalent tests outside the loop. It
also eliminates bound checks where the range of values of the index inside

> the loop is discovered (need to be a compile time constant) and checks are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the loop is discovered (if it is a compile time constant) and checks are
```

inserted outside the loop so that no bound checks fail inside the loop.

This analysis uses induction variable information found by [Value Propagation](https://github.com/eclipse/omr/blob/master/doc/compiler/optimizer/ValuePropagation.md).
Another versioning test that is emitted ensures the loop will not run for a

> very long period of time (in which case the async check inside the loop can

Reviewer 2: Is there any place that describes what an async check?

Reviewer 3: Not to my knowledge. Async checks get added by the VM at backward branches in the bytecodes on the assumption that one cannot have a loop without a backwards branch. The async check is used for many purposes all of which are some variant of the need to periodically have all application threads yield in order for some sort of action to be taken, with the prime examples being a) GC and b) walk the stack to sample where the thread is executing for driving compilation control. A better definition may be possible, but that hopefully gives the gist.

be removed). This special versioning test depends on the number of trees
(code) inside the loop.

Loop Specialization replaces loop-invariant expressions that are profiled
and found to be constants, with the constant value after inserting a test
outside the loop that compares the value to the constant. Note that this
cannot be done in the the absence of value profiling infrastructure.

## Loop Unrolling and Peeling
A majority of loops can be unrolled or peeled with or without the loop driving
tests done after each iteration (loop) body. Usually a peel is inserted before
the unrolled loop and the residual iterations to be done (at most u-1 residual
iterations where u is the unroll factor) are also done using the peeled code.
Peeling aids [Partial Redundancy Elimination (PRE)](optimizer/GlobalOptimizationsSummary.md)
as code does not have to be moved; instead commoning of dominated expressions can be done
(which is far easier than code motion because of problems introduced by exception checks
in Java).

> 

Reviewer 3: We had a plan to implement loop peeling but we never actually did it. So the documentation should not be included for it.

Async checks (yield points) are eliminated from u-1 unrolled bodies and only
one remains. Unroll factors and code growth thresholds are arrived at based
on profiling information when available. This analysis uses induction variable
information found by [Value Propagation](https://github.com/eclipse/omr/blob/master/doc/compiler/optimizer/ValuePropagation.md).

## Loop Invariant Code Motion
Done as part of [Partial Redundancy Elimination (PRE)](optimizer/GlobalOptimizationsSummary.md)

## Loop Inversion
Loop Inversion converts a loop where the induction variable is counting up
from zero into one where it counts down to zero. Note that this can only be
done if the inversion of the loop does not affect program semantics inside
the loop (order of exceptions thrown etc). The benefit of doing this is the
fact that there are, in general, instructions that can perform compare/branch

> against zero in an efficient manner and special counter machine register

Reviewer: ```suggestion
against zero in an efficient manner and special counter machine registers
```

(for e.g. On PowerPC) can be used.

## Loop Striding
Loop Striding creates derived induction variables (e.g. the address calculation
for array accesses `&a[i]`) and increment/decrement the derived induction
variables by the appropriate stride through every iteration of the loop.

> This can eliminate some complex array address calculations inside the loop,
> instead replacing by a load (reg or memory). Note that we also create derived

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can eliminate some complex array address calculations inside the loop,
replaced instead by a load (reg or memory). Note that we also create derived
```

temp and convert the loads/stores of the field to loads/stores of the newly
created temp and remove the loads/stores of the field from inside the loop.

The value of the temp at all exit points out of the loop is stored back into
the field thus maintaining program semantics subsequent to the loop. Note
that PRE would do Field Privatization, but would not be able to eliminate
the stores to the field from the loop (unless a separate PRE pass is done
on the reversed CFG, which is expensive in compile time). Note that this
optimization can only be done if there are no calls/unresolved accesses in
the loop (as the field value could be read otherwise) and that makes it
rare.

## Async Check (yield point) Placement/Removal
The algorithm for minimizing the async checks in a given loop attempts to
achieve its goal by adopting two distinct methods:

- Check if the loop is known to be short running (either based on induction
variable information obtained from [Value Propagation](https://github.com/eclipse/omr/blob/master/doc/compiler/optimizer/ValuePropagation.md))
or if the special versioning test for short running loops (mentioned earlier)

> is found. In either case, since the loop is provably not long running and does
> not require an async check at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is found. In either case, since the loop is provably not long running it does
not require an async check at all.
```

- If async checks cannot be skipped completely for the loop, attempt to place

> the sync checks at points within the loop such that there is minimal redundancy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the async checks at points within the loop such that there is minimal redundancy
```
